[blog] Spring starter stable (#4937)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2024/spring-starter-stable/index.md

---
title: The OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter is now stable
linkTitle: Spring Starter GA
date: 2024-

> author:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author: [Gregor Zeitlinger](https://github.com/zeitlinger) (Grafana Labs)
issue: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/issues/11581
sig: Java
```

---

We're proud to announce that the OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter is now
generally available.

The [Spring Boot](https://spring.io/projects/spring-boot) starter is a powerful
tool that simplifies the process of instrumenting Spring Boot applications with
OpenTelemetry. It provides a lightweight, flexible alternative to the
OpenTelemetry Java agent, making it easier than ever to monitor your Spring Boot
applications.

In this blog post, we'll explain when you should use the Spring Starter, what it
actually means to be stable, and what we learned along the way.

If you just want to get started, check out the
[Spring Starter documentation](/docs/zero-code/java/spring-boot-starter).

> ## Why is the Spring Starter Important?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Why does the Spring Starter matter?
```

Spring users have come to expect starters as a standard method for addressing
various aspects of application development. Unlike other configurations, a
Spring starter simplifies the setup process without the need for additional JVM
options or Docker files. This ease of use and integration is what makes the

> Spring starter an essential tool in the Spring ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: Excellent intro!

Author: praise goes to copilot in this case :upside_down_face:

## When to use the Spring Starter?

It may be a bit surprising, but our default recommendation for Spring Boot apps
is still to use the [**OpenTelemetry Java agent**](/docs/zero-code/java/agent)
with bytecode instrumentation, as it provides more out-of-the-box
instrumentation than the Spring Starter (some things are only possible with

> bytecode instrumentation).

Reviewer 2: I suggest moving the recommendation to the end of the section.

> So here are some scenarios where you might want to use the Spring Starter
> instead:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here are some scenarios where you might want to use the Spring Starter:
```

- **Spring Boot Native image** applications for which the OpenTelemetry Java
  agent does not work
- **Startup overhead** of the OpenTelemetry Java agent exceeding your
  requirements
- A Java monitoring agent already used because the OpenTelemetry Java agent
  might not work with the other agent
- **Spring Boot configuration files** (`application.properties`,
  `application.yml`) to configure the OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter which
  doesn't work with the OpenTelemetry Java agent
- **Programmatic configuration** of the OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter, such
  as
  [dynamic auth headers](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/zero-code/java/spring-boot-starter/sdk-configuration/#configure-the-exporter-programmatically),
  using Spring beans (the OpenTelemetry Java agent requires an
  [extension](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/zero-code/java/agent/extensions/)
  for this)

> ## What does it mean to be stable?

Reviewer 2: A great question, and not just for software...

---
title: The OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter is now stable
linkTitle: Spring Starter GA

> date: 2024-

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2024-
```

@zeitlinger any timelines for publishing this?

Author: in about a month - if possible I'd like to have the micrometer explanation be published before 

@trask fyi

author: >

>   [Gregor Zeitlinger](https://github.com/zeitlinger) (Grafana Labs) & [Jean

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [Gregor Zeitlinger](https://github.com/zeitlinger) (Grafana Labs), [Jean
```

---
title: The OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter is now stable
linkTitle: Spring Starter GA
date: 2024-
author: >
  [Gregor Zeitlinger](https://github.com/zeitlinger) (Grafana Labs), [Jean
  Bisutti](https://github.com/jeanbisutti) (Microsoft)
issue: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/issues/11581
sig: Java
cSpell:ignore: Bisutti Gregor Zeitlinger
---

We're proud to announce that the OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter is now
generally available.

The [Spring Boot](https://spring.io/projects/spring-boot) starter is a powerful
tool that simplifies the process of instrumenting Spring Boot applications with
OpenTelemetry. It provides a lightweight, flexible alternative to the
OpenTelemetry Java agent, making it easier than ever to observe your Spring Boot
applications.

> In this blog post, we'll explain when you should use the Spring Starter, what it

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this blog post, we will explain when you should use the Spring Starter, what it
```

- **Startup overhead** of the OpenTelemetry Java agent exceeding your
  requirements
- A Java monitoring agent already used because the OpenTelemetry Java agent
  might not work with the other agent
- **Spring Boot configuration files** (`application.properties`,
  `application.yml`) to configure the OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter which
  doesn't work with the OpenTelemetry Java agent
- **Programmatic configuration** of the OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter, such
  as
  [dynamic auth headers](/docs/zero-code/java/spring-boot-starter/sdk-configuration/#configure-the-exporter-programmatically),
  using Spring beans (the OpenTelemetry Java agent requires an
  [extension](/docs/zero-code/java/agent/extensions/) for this)

It may be a bit surprising, but our default recommendation for Spring Boot apps
is still to use the [**OpenTelemetry Java agent**](/docs/zero-code/java/agent)
with bytecode instrumentation, as it provides more out-of-the-box
instrumentation than the Spring Starter, since some things are only possible
with bytecode instrumentation.

## What does it mean to be stable?

The Spring Starter is now stable, which means that it is ready for production
use.

> - **Support for GraalVM**: The Spring Starter is fully compatible with GraalVM

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Support for GraalVM**: The Spring Starter is compatible with GraalVM
```

  breaks existing users.
- **Stable API**: The API is stable and will not change in a way that breaks
  existing users.
- **Stable Configuration**: The configuration options are stable and will not
  change in a way that breaks existing users.
- **Compatible Configuration**: The configuration is compatible with the
  OpenTelemetry Java agent - so you can switch between the two without any
  issues.
- **Mature Documentation**: The
  [documentation](/docs/zero-code/java/spring-boot-starter/) is mature and
  covers all aspects of the Spring Starter.
- **Community Support**: The Spring Starter has a [community](/community/)
  (`otel-java` Slack channel) of users who can help you with any issues you
  might encounter.
- **Regular Updates**: The Spring Starter is actively maintained and updated
  with new features and bug fixes.

A notable exemption are semantic conventions, which are still evolving and may
change in the future. Some of the conventions are still in the experimental
phase and may change in the future.
[HTTP semantic conventions](/docs/specs/semconv/http/http-metrics/) are stable
and will not change.

## What did we learn along the way?

> Testing across different versions of Spring Boot is no easy task, especially

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Testing across different versions of Spring Boot is not an easy task, especially
```

when you add GraalVM to the mix.

> But maybe more interesting is the fact that we learned how to create interfaces

Author: @zeitlinger add an example

Author: @jeanbisutti please check

## When to use the Spring Starter?

Here are some scenarios where you might want to use the Spring Starter:

- **Spring Boot Native image** applications for which the OpenTelemetry Java
  agent does not work
- **Startup overhead** of the OpenTelemetry Java agent exceeding your
  requirements
- A Java monitoring agent already used because the OpenTelemetry Java agent
  might not work with the other agent
- **Spring Boot configuration files** (`application.properties`,
  `application.yml`) to configure the OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter which
  doesn't work with the OpenTelemetry Java agent
- **Programmatic configuration** of the OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter, such
  as
  [dynamic auth headers](/docs/zero-code/java/spring-boot-starter/sdk-configuration/#configure-the-exporter-programmatically),
  using Spring beans (the OpenTelemetry Java agent requires an
  [extension](/docs/zero-code/java/agent/extensions/) for this)

It may be a bit surprising, but our default recommendation for Spring Boot apps
is still to use the [**OpenTelemetry Java agent**](/docs/zero-code/java/agent)
with bytecode instrumentation, as it provides more out-of-the-box

> instrumentation than the Spring Starter, since some things are only possible

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
instrumentation than the Spring Starter.
```

Vague. I would expand or remove this.

[AutoConfigurationCustomizerProvider](/docs/languages/java/configuration/#autoconfigurationcustomizerprovider) 
instance - an idiomatic Spring Boot approach to customization.

This example shows how to create a bean that customizes the sampler to drop spans for paths starting with `/actuator`:

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<?code-excerpt "src/main/java/otel/FilterPaths.java"?>
```java
package otel;

import io.opentelemetry.api.trace.SpanKind;
import io.opentelemetry.contrib.sampler.RuleBasedRoutingSampler;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.autoconfigure.spi.AutoConfigurationCustomizerProvider;
import io.opentelemetry.semconv.UrlAttributes;
import org.springframework.context.annotation.Bean;
import org.springframework.context.annotation.Configuration;

@Configuration
public class FilterPaths {

  @Bean
  public AutoConfigurationCustomizerProvider otelCustomizer() {
    return p ->
        p.addSamplerCustomizer(
            (fallback, config) ->
                RuleBasedRoutingSampler.builder(SpanKind.SERVER, fallback)
                    .drop(UrlAttributes.URL_PATH, "^/actuator")
                    .build());
  }
}
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

> The full list of SPI interfaces that can be implemented as Spring beans can be found in the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can find the available SPI interfaces implementable as Spring beans in the
```

The SDK auto-configuration did not know about Spring beans, so we came up with a new interface,
[ComponentLoader](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/release/v1.40.x/sdk-extensions/autoconfigure/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/sdk/autoconfigure/internal/ComponentLoader.java),
that allows you to register Spring beans that will be loaded by the
OpenTelemetry SDK auto-configuration.

The [Spring Starter implementation of the ComponentLoader interface](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/main/instrumentation/spring/spring-boot-autoconfigure/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/instrumentation/spring/autoconfigure/OpenTelemetryAutoConfiguration.java#L162-L181) 
uses Spring's `ApplicationContext` to find all beans of a certain type.

This allows you to register your own customizers, and other SDK components as Spring beans.
You can find the available SPI interfaces implementable as Spring beans in the
[OpenTelemetry SDK auto-configuration SPI documentation](/docs/languages/java/configuration/#spi-service-provider-interface).

You should be able to customize most aspects of the OpenTelemetry SDK by implementing a bean that returns an 

> [AutoConfigurationCustomizerProvider](/docs/languages/java/configuration/#autoconfigurationcustomizerprovider) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`AutoConfigurationCustomizerProvider`](/docs/languages/java/configuration/#autoconfigurationcustomizerprovider) 
```

instance - an idiomatic Spring Boot approach to customization.

This example shows how to create a bean that customizes the sampler to drop spans for paths starting with `/actuator`:

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<?code-excerpt "src/main/java/otel/FilterPaths.java"?>
```java

> package otel;

Reviewer: I don't think we should use code excerpts with blog posts: they are a snapshot in time, and we accept them to outdated eventually. Otherwise we create a lot of maintenance overhead to keep them updated.

  </dependency>
```

Navigate to the project directory and build a Spring Boot native image application:
```bash
cd spring-petclinic
mvn -Pnative spring-boot:build-image -Dspring-boot.build-image.imageName=spring-petclinic-native
```

You may have to disable the `PostgresIntegrationTests` test class to get this command line working ([see](https://github.com/spring-projects/spring-petclinic/issues/1522)):
```java
@Disabled
public class PostgresIntegrationTests 
```

The OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter sends the telemetry data with the [OpenTelemetry Protocol](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/) (OTLP). By default, it sends the data over HTTP. You can also [switch to gRPC](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/java/configuration/#otlp-exporter-span-metric-and-log-exporters).

We are going to add an [OpenTelemetry collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/) and display the telemetry data in the collector logs.

You can also use your favorite OTLP-compatible backend - we use collector logs for simplicity here.

To do this, let's add the following `docker-compose-otel.yml` and `collector-spring-native-config.yaml` files in the `spring-petclinic` directory: 

> docker-compose-otel.yml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
title: The OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter is now stable
linkTitle: Spring Starter stable
date: 2024-09-30
author: >
  [Gregor Zeitlinger](https://github.com/zeitlinger) (Grafana Labs), [Jean
  Bisutti](https://github.com/jeanbisutti) (Microsoft)
issue: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/issues/11581
sig: Java
cSpell:ignore: Bisutti Gregor Zeitlinger
---

> <!-- markdownlint-disable blanks-around-fences -->
> <?code-excerpt path-base="examples/java/spring-starter"?>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- markdownlint-disable blanks-around-fences -->
<?code-excerpt path-base="examples/java/spring-starter"?>
```

Let's not use code-excerpt in blog posts. They will outdated eventually but this is by design

We're proud to announce that the OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter is now

> generally available.

Author: @jeanbisutti here we don't say "stable" - is this ok?

The [Spring Boot](https://spring.io/projects/spring-boot) starter is a powerful
tool that simplifies the process of instrumenting Spring Boot applications with
OpenTelemetry. It provides a lightweight, flexible alternative to the
OpenTelemetry Java agent, making it easier than ever to observe your Spring Boot
applications.

In this blog post, we will explain when you should use the Spring Starter, what it
actually means to be stable, what are the main features, and which challenges we faced. 

> In the last part, we will demonstrate some of the starter's features using a GraalVM native image 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the last part, we will demonstrate some of the starter's features using a [GraalVM native image](https://www.graalvm.org/latest/reference-manual/native-image/) 
```

            <type>pom</type>
            <scope>import</scope>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
</dependencyManagement>
```

Now, we can include the OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter dependency to the Spring PetClinic application:

```xml
  <dependency>
    <groupId>io.opentelemetry.instrumentation</groupId>
    <artifactId>opentelemetry-spring-boot-starter</artifactId>
  </dependency>
```

Navigate to the project directory and build a Spring Boot native image application:
```bash
cd spring-petclinic
mvn -Pnative spring-boot:build-image -Dspring-boot.build-image.imageName=spring-petclinic-native
```

You may have to disable the `PostgresIntegrationTests` test class to get this command line working ([see](https://github.com/spring-projects/spring-petclinic/issues/1522)):
```java
@Disabled
public class PostgresIntegrationTests 
```

The OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter sends the telemetry data with the [OpenTelemetry Protocol](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/) (OTLP). By default, it sends the data over HTTP. You can also [switch to gRPC](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/java/configuration/#otlp-exporter-span-metric-and-log-exporters).

> We are going to add an [OpenTelemetry collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/) and display the telemetry data in the collector logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are going to add an [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/) and display the telemetry data in the Collector logs.
```

> You can also use your favorite OTLP-compatible backend - we use collector logs for simplicity here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use your favorite OTLP-compatible backend - we use Collector logs for simplicity here.
```

> To do this, let's add the following `docker-compose-otel.yml` and `collector-spring-native-config.yaml` files in the `spring-petclinic` directory: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do this, let's begin with adding the following `docker-compose-otel.yml` file in the `spring-petclinic` directory: 
```

```yaml
version: '3.8'
services:
  app:
    image: spring-petclinic-native
    environment:
      OTEL_SERVICE_NAME: "graal-native-example-app"
      OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT: "http://collector:4318"
    ports:
      - "8080:8080"
    depends_on:
      - collector
  collector:
    image: otel/opentelemetry-collector-contrib:0.109.0
    volumes:
      - ./collector-spring-native-config.yaml:/collector-spring-native-config.yaml
    command: ["--config=/collector-spring-native-config.yaml"]
    expose:
      - "4317"
    ports:
      - "4317:4317"
```

> collector-spring-native-config.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, also add a file called `collector-spring-native-config.yaml`:

```

```yaml 
receivers:
  otlp:
    protocols:
      http:
        endpoint: "0.0.0.0:4318"
exporters:
  debug:
    verbosity: detailed
service:
  pipelines:
    metrics:
      receivers: [otlp]
      exporters: [debug]
    traces:
      receivers: [otlp]
      exporters: [debug]
    logs:
      receivers: [otlp]
      exporters: [debug]

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

Now, we can run the Spring PetClinic application and the OpenTelemetry collector:

```bash
docker-compose -f docker-compose-otel.yml up
```

> Let's check the collector logs to see the telemetry data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's check the Collector logs to see the telemetry data.
```

We can spot one log record about the Spring PetClinic application startup:

```
2024-09-16 14:19:11 collector-1  | LogRecord #2
2024-09-16 14:19:11 collector-1  | ObservedTimestamp: 2024-09-16 12:19:10.38137 +0000 UTC
2024-09-16 14:19:11 collector-1  | Timestamp: 2024-09-16 12:19:10.379 +0000 UTC
2024-09-16 14:19:11 collector-1  | SeverityText: INFO
2024-09-16 14:19:11 collector-1  | SeverityNumber: Info(9)
2024-09-16 14:19:11 collector-1  | Body: Str(Started PetClinicApplication in 0.489 seconds (process running for 0.493))
```

The OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter has instrumented Logback and has sent the 'Started PetClinicApplication in 0.489 seconds (process running for 0.493)' telemetry log record to the OpenTelemetry collector.

Let's open the <http://localhost:8080/vets.html> in our web browser or execute the following curl command:

```shell
curl http://localhost:8080/vets.html
```

> If we look at the collector logs, we can see that one span has been created for the HTTP request with the Trace ID `16a0a5be5127309858c7c63a76b3f471` (it will be a different Trace ID in your case):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we look at the Collector logs, we can see that one span has been created for the HTTP request with the Trace ID `16a0a5be5127309858c7c63a76b3f471` (it will be a different Trace ID in your case):
```

sig: Java
cSpell:ignore: Bisutti Gregor Zeitlinger
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable blanks-around-fences -->
<?code-excerpt path-base="examples/java/spring-starter"?>

We're proud to announce that the OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter is now stable.

The [Spring Boot](https://spring.io/projects/spring-boot) starter is a powerful
tool that simplifies the process of instrumenting Spring Boot applications with
OpenTelemetry. It provides a lightweight, flexible alternative to the
OpenTelemetry Java agent, making it easier than ever to observe your Spring Boot
applications.

In this blog post, we will explain when you should use the Spring Starter, what it
actually means to be stable, what are the main features, and which challenges we faced. 
In the last part, we will demonstrate some of the starter's features using a GraalVM native image 
application.

If you just want to get started, check out the
[Spring Starter documentation](/docs/zero-code/java/spring-boot-starter).

## When to use the Spring Starter?

Here are some scenarios where you might want to use the Spring Starter:

- **Spring Boot Native image** applications for which the OpenTelemetry Java
  agent does not work

> - **Startup overhead** of the OpenTelemetry Java agent exceeding your

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **Startup overhead** of the OpenTelemetry Java agent exceeds your
```

  requirements

> - A Java agent is already used because the OpenTelemetry Java agent
>   might not work with the other agent

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Another monitoring Java agent is already used and it is causing compatibility issues with the OpenTelemetry Java agent
```

- **Spring Boot configuration files** (`application.properties`,
  `application.yml`) to configure the OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter which
  doesn't work with the OpenTelemetry Java agent
- **Programmatic configuration** of the OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter, such
  as
  [dynamic auth headers](/docs/zero-code/java/spring-boot-starter/sdk-configuration/#configure-the-exporter-programmatically),
  using Spring beans (the OpenTelemetry Java agent requires an
  [extension](/docs/zero-code/java/agent/extensions/) for this)
- **Uses code dependencies**: You don't need to add any JVM options (e.g. in your Docker file) - 
  just add a dependency and a BOM to your `pom.xml` or `build.gradle` file

It may be a bit surprising, but if you don't build a Spring native image application
our default recommendation is to use the [**OpenTelemetry Java agent**](/docs/zero-code/java/agent)

> with bytecode instrumentation, as it provides more out of the box instrumentation than the 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
with bytecode instrumentation, as it provides a simpler onboarding experience and provides much more out of the box instrumentation than the 
```

Author: I don't agree - starters is the easier onboarding experience for spring users

Reviewer 4: that's fair 👍

Spring Starter instrumentations - as we will see later.

## What does it mean to be stable?

The Spring Starter is now stable, which means that it is ready for production
use.

> - **Stable API**: The API is stable and will not change in a way that breaks
>   existing users.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **Stable API**: The API is stable and will not change in a way that breaks
  users.
```

- **Stable Configuration**: The configuration options are stable and will not

>   change in a way that breaks existing users.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  change in a way that breaks users.
```

  covers all aspects of the Spring Starter.
- **Community Support**: The Spring Starter has a [community](/community/)
  (`otel-java` Slack channel) of users who can help you with any issues you
  might encounter.
- **Regular Updates**: The Spring Starter is actively maintained and updated
  with new features and bug fixes.

Note that the Spring Starter uses some semantic conventions that are not stable, 
which are still evolving and may change in the future. 
[HTTP semantic conventions](/docs/specs/semconv/http/http-metrics/) are stable and will not change.
[Database semantic conventions](/docs/specs/semconv/database/database-metrics/) are still experimental and may change.
However, they are expected to become stable at the end of 2024.

## Main features of the Spring Starter stable release

When we started the Spring Boot starter stable project in February 2024, we defined the main features we wanted to 
achieve, which we will explain in the following sections.

### Out of the box instrumentation

The OpenTelemetry starter provides 
[out of the box instrumentations for most popular usages](/docs/zero-code/java/spring-boot-starter/out-of-the-box-instrumentation/).

> The OpenTelemetry Java agent includes more [out of the box instrumentations](/docs/zero-code/java/agent/disable/#suppressing-specific-agent-instrumentation),
> but you can enable more instrumentations in the Spring Starter by 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The OpenTelemetry Java agent includes many more [out of the box instrumentations](/docs/zero-code/java/agent/disable/#suppressing-specific-agent-instrumentation),
but you can opt-in to additional instrumentations in the Spring Starter by 
```

## The OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter in action

We will demonstrate some features of the OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter for OpenTelemetry with the popular Spring PetClinic application.

First, we clone the Spring PetClinic application from GitHub:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/spring-projects/spring-petclinic.git
```

In the `pom.xml` file, let's add the OpenTelemetry instrumentation BOM:
```xml
  <dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>

        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.opentelemetry.instrumentation</groupId>
            <artifactId>opentelemetry-instrumentation-bom</artifactId>
            <version>2.7.0</version>
            <type>pom</type>
            <scope>import</scope>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
</dependencyManagement>
```

Now, we can include the OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter dependency to the Spring PetClinic application:

```xml
  <dependency>
    <groupId>io.opentelemetry.instrumentation</groupId>
    <artifactId>opentelemetry-spring-boot-starter</artifactId>
  </dependency>
```

Navigate to the project directory and build a Spring Boot native image application:
```bash
cd spring-petclinic

> mvn -Pnative spring-boot:build-image -Dspring-boot.build-image.imageName=spring-petclinic-native

Reviewer 3: The Docker compose file expects an image:    https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/blob/dd597b88c50234bc1bba18f08460cdfe19613e28/content/en/blog/2024/spring-starter-stable/index.md?plain=1#L185 

I would prefer that the example focuses on a native image, and that the blog post does not detail several possible configurations.

```

You may have to disable the `PostgresIntegrationTests` test class to get this command line, [see](https://github.com/spring-projects/spring-petclinic/issues/1522).

> The OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter sends the telemetry data with the [OpenTelemetry Protocol](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/) (OTLP). By default, it sends the data over HTTP. You can also switch to gRPC.

Author: ```suggestion
The OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter sends the telemetry data with the [OpenTelemetry Protocol](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/) (OTLP). By default, it sends the data over HTTP. You can also [switch to gRPC](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/java/configuration/#otlp-exporter-span-metric-and-log-exporters).
```

> By default, the OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter sends telemetry data using the [OpenTelemetry Protocol](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/) (OTLP) over HTTP, but it can also use gRPC.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> We are going to add an [OpenTelemetry collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/) and display the telemetry data in the collector logs.

Author: ```suggestion
We are going to add an [OpenTelemetry collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/) and display the telemetry data in the collector logs.

You can also use your favorite OTLP-compatible backend - we use collector logs for simplicity here.
```

To do this, let's add the following `docker-compose-otel.yml` and `collector-spring-native-config.yaml` files in the `spring-petclinic` directory: 

docker-compose-otel.yml
```yaml
version: '3.8'
services:
  app:
    image: spring-petclinic-native
    environment:
      OTEL_SERVICE_NAME: "graal-native-example-app"
      OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT: "http://collector:4318"
    ports:
      - "8080:8080"
    depends_on:
      - collector
  collector:
    image: otel/opentelemetry-collector-contrib:0.109.0
    volumes:
      - ./collector-spring-native-config.yaml:/collector-spring-native-config.yaml
    command: ["--config=/collector-spring-native-config.yaml"]
    expose:
      - "4317"
    ports:
      - "4317:4317"
```

collector-spring-native-config.yaml
```yaml 
receivers:
  otlp:
    protocols:
      http:
        endpoint: "0.0.0.0:4318"
exporters:
  logging:
    verbosity: detailed
service:
  pipelines:
    metrics:
      receivers: [otlp]

>       exporters: [logging]

Author: logging is outdated: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/exporter/debugexporter/README.md

Reviewer 3: It does not seem applicable to the pipelines section.

Reviewer 5: i think these are changing, see here https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-examples/pull/491

so i think this becomes:
```
exporters:
  debug:
    verbosity: detailed
service:
  pipelines:
    metrics:
      receivers: [otlp]
      exporters: [debug]
      ...
```

    traces:
      receivers: [otlp]
      exporters: [logging]
    logs:
      receivers: [otlp]
      exporters: [logging]

```

Now, we can run the Spring PetClinic application and the OpenTelemetry collector:

```bash
docker-compose -f docker-compose-otel.yml up
```

Let's check the collector logs to see the telemetry data.

We can spot one log record about the Spring PetClinic application startup:

```
2024-09-16 14:19:11 collector-1  | LogRecord #2
2024-09-16 14:19:11 collector-1  | ObservedTimestamp: 2024-09-16 12:19:10.38137 +0000 UTC
2024-09-16 14:19:11 collector-1  | Timestamp: 2024-09-16 12:19:10.379 +0000 UTC
2024-09-16 14:19:11 collector-1  | SeverityText: INFO
2024-09-16 14:19:11 collector-1  | SeverityNumber: Info(9)
2024-09-16 14:19:11 collector-1  | Body: Str(Started PetClinicApplication in 0.489 seconds (process running for 0.493))
```

> The OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter has instrumented Logbacka and has sent the 'Started PetClinicApplication in 0.489 seconds (process running for 0.493)' telemetry log record to the OpenTelemetry collector.

Author: ```suggestion
The OpenTelemetry Spring Boot starter has instrumented Logback and has sent the 'Started PetClinicApplication in 0.489 seconds (process running for 0.493)' telemetry log record to the OpenTelemetry collector.
```

Let's open the `http://localhost:8080/vets.html` in our web browser or execute the following curl command:
```shell
curl http://localhost:8080/vets.html
```

> If we look at the collector logs, we can see that one span has been created for the HTTP request with the trace id `16a0a5be5127309858c7c63a76b3f471`:

Author: ```suggestion
If we look at the collector logs, we can see that one span has been created for the HTTP request with the Trace ID `16a0a5be5127309858c7c63a76b3f471` (it will be a different Trace ID in your case):
```

```

> collector-1  | InstrumentationScope io.opentelemetry.spring-webmvc-6.0 2.7.0-alpha

Author: change to 2.8.0 everywhere

collector-1  | Span #0
collector-1  |     Trace ID       : 16a0a5be5127309858c7c63a76b3f471
collector-1  |     Parent ID      :
collector-1  |     ID             : 280f551fe70df80b
collector-1  |     Name           : GET /vets.html
collector-1  |     Kind           : Server
collector-1  |     Start time     : 2024-09-16 12:39:41.590128 +0000 UTC
collector-1  |     End time       : 2024-09-16 12:39:41.62597148 +0000 UTC
collector-1  |     Status code    : Unset
collector-1  |     Status message :
collector-1  | Attributes:
collector-1  |      -> url.path: Str(/vets.html)
collector-1  |      -> http.response.status_code: Int(200)
collector-1  |      -> network.peer.address: Str(172.19.0.1)
collector-1  |      -> server.address: Str(localhost)
collector-1  |      -> client.address: Str(172.19.0.1)
collector-1  |      -> user_agent.original: Str(curl/8.0.1)
collector-1  |      -> server.port: Int(8080)
collector-1  |      -> network.peer.port: Int(58886)
collector-1  |      -> http.route: Str(/vets.html)
collector-1  |      -> network.protocol.version: Str(1.1)
collector-1  |      -> http.request.method: Str(GET)
collector-1  |      -> url.scheme: Str(http)
```

> For the same trace id, we can notice telemetry date emitted by the database instrumentation:

Author: ```suggestion
For the same Trace ID, we can notice telemetry data emitted by the database instrumentation:
```

instance - an idiomatic Spring Boot approach to customization.

This example shows how to create a bean that customizes the sampler to drop spans for paths starting with `/actuator`:

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<?code-excerpt "src/main/java/otel/FilterPaths.java"?>
```java
package otel;

import io.opentelemetry.api.trace.SpanKind;
import io.opentelemetry.contrib.sampler.RuleBasedRoutingSampler;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.autoconfigure.spi.AutoConfigurationCustomizerProvider;
import io.opentelemetry.semconv.UrlAttributes;
import org.springframework.context.annotation.Bean;
import org.springframework.context.annotation.Configuration;

@Configuration
public class FilterPaths {

  @Bean
  public AutoConfigurationCustomizerProvider otelCustomizer() {
    return p ->
        p.addSamplerCustomizer(
            (fallback, config) ->
                RuleBasedRoutingSampler.builder(SpanKind.SERVER, fallback)
                    .drop(UrlAttributes.URL_PATH, "^/actuator")
                    .build());
  }
}
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

You can also create your own exporter, to 

> [export spans to memory](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/1b5d47eadcef33405b3065ff57e9d96bb15d795a/smoke-tests-otel-starter/spring-smoke-testing/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/spring/smoketest/SpringSmokeOtelConfiguration.java#L50-L63).

Reviewer 3: This other configuration is also needed to have this metric exporter works: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/1b5d47eadcef33405b3065ff57e9d96bb15d795a/smoke-tests-otel-starter/spring-smoke-testing/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/spring/smoketest/SpringSmokeOtelConfiguration.java#L50-L63 If we keep this example, we should mention the two required configurations.
